I want you to try and imagine two
completely different scenarios, and when I say different,
I mean they feel like they belong in
just entirely separate universes.
Okay.
I'm with you.
So, first, imagine a catastrophic leak of proprietary
AI code from like a major multi-billion
dollar tech company, you know, sirens blaring, crisis
PR teams scrambling, stock prices taking a massive
hit.
And engineers just frantically trying to figure out
who left the digital back door open.
Exactly.
It's a total disaster.
Now, wipe that completely from your mind and
imagine scenario two.
You're sitting quietly at your desk reading an
essay or maybe a long article that was
generated by an AI.
Right.
Happens all the time now.
Yeah.
And it has perfect grammar.
The vocabulary is excellent.
The sentence structure is flawless.
But as you read it, paragraph after paragraph,
you start to get this sinking, almost, I
don't know, soul-crushing feeling that what you're
reading is utterly and completely hollow.
Like there's nobody home.
Oh, absolutely.
That is a very distinct, very quiet kind
of disappointment, isn't it?
It really is.
I mean, one is this high-stakes, billion
-dollar emergency, and the other is just that
weird, uncanny, aesthetic fatigue we all get now
when we're just browsing the internet.
Right.
And on the surface, they have absolutely nothing
to do with each other.
But today, we're doing a deep dive into
a dense, incredibly ambitious theoretical paper by an
independent researcher named Fliction.
It's called Constraint Closure and Its Failures.
Yeah.
It's a brilliant piece of work.
Okay.
Let's unpack this because the core mission of
our conversation today is to explore how this
researcher uses high-level mathematics, the laws of
thermodynamics and system dynamics, to prove that this
massive corporate code leak and your hollow, boring
AI essay are, mathematically speaking, the exact same
structural failure.
It really is a remarkable piece of synthesis.
I mean, the paper takes the formal mathematical
machinery that we normally use to analyze complex
high-dimensional software systems.
Like the big AI models.
Exactly.
And it applies that exact same machinery to
the analysis of human writing and language.
And it proves that both of these failures,
you know, the code leaking and the essay
feeling empty, they happen when a system operates
under a specific lack of constraint.
It's wild.
By the time we finish walking through this,
I think it's going to completely change how
you evaluate the articles you read, the software
you use, and really just how you judge
the reliability of information in a world that
is totally saturated by AI.
Yeah.
I think so, too.
And to get to that realization about writing,
we have to start with the first scenario,
right?
The AI code leak.
Right.
The big disaster.
Because the author approaches this from a very
unusual angle.
They don't look at a leak as a
simple security breach.
They model it as a geometric problem.
They call it a projection event.
Okay.
A projection event.
Let's break that down, because when I hear
projection, I immediately think like a movie projector
casting an image on a wall.
That is actually the perfect way to visualize
it.
I mean, think about the difference between the
actual film reel or the digital file inside
the projector and the 2D image you see
on the wall.
Okay.
The paper separates the world into two spaces.
First, you have what they call the hidden
reality of the AI system, or the configuration
space.
Configuration space.
So that's the projector.
Exactly.
This is everything.
The massive millions of lines of source code,
the deployment scripts, the internal organizational protocols, the
testing pipelines.
All the messy behind-the-scenes stuff.
Right.
Even the unspoken, unwritten habits of the engineers
who built it.
This is a massively complex, multidimensional space, and
no one outside the company can see it.
It's like the whole private universe of that
specific company.
Exactly.
But then, a leak happens.
And a crucial point the paper makes is
that a leak never gives away that entire
hidden universe.
It literally can't.
Because it's too big.
Yeah.
What leaks is just a shadow.
It is a projection of that massive reality
into a much smaller, observable space.
The observation space.
Maybe it's a few key files, some module
boundaries, or a specific set of weights.
Okay.
So if I'm a rival tech company, and
I get my hands on this leaked code,
I'm essentially just looking at the shadow on
the wall.
I don't have the projector.
I don't have the original film.
Precisely.
And in mathematics, when you squash a complex
3D object into a 2D shadow, you lose
a massive amount of information.
The paper refers to this as having high
degeneracy.
Degeneracy.
Yeah.
Okay.
What does that mean in this context?
Basically, if you just see a circular shadow
on the wall, you don't actually know what
cast it.
Oh, right.
Because it could be a sphere.
Exactly.
It could be a sphere.
It could be a cylinder standing on its
end.
It could be a weirdly shaped cone.
There are thousands of different hidden objects that
could theoretically cast the exact same shadow.
Which means, logically, the tech company that suffered
the leak should actually be perfectly safe.
Right.
You would think so.
Yeah.
I mean, if the competitors only have the
shadow, they don't have enough data to rebuild
the complex multi-billion dollar machine.
There are just too many missing variables.
But that isn't what happened in the real
world at all.
No.
Not even close.
When these leaks have happened recently, the public
and competitors have reconstructed the full models incredibly
fast.
Like shockingly fast.
How is that possible if they only have
the shadow?
What's fascinating here is where the paper introduces
the concept of the shared prior.
When external engineers try to rebuild a leaked
system, they aren't searching blindly through all the
infinite possibilities of what could have cast that
shadow.
They aren't trying every single shape.
Right.
They are operating within a very specific industry.
And the AI industry shares an enormous amount
of common knowledge.
They all read the same open source papers.
They use the same standard mathematical conventions.
They go to the same conferences.
Okay.
I think I need an analogy here to
really lock this in.
So, if the leaked code is the shadow,
the reconstruction process is like trying to put
together a massive 10,000-piece jigsaw puzzle,
but you've only been given one single piece.
That's a really good way to look at
it.
Normally, if I hand you one piece of
a 10,000-piece puzzle, you are completely
helpless.
You have no idea where it goes, what
the colors mean, or what the final picture
is supposed to be.
That one piece is basically useless on its
own.
Right.
But what if every single puzzle builder in
the world already has the picture on the
box memorized?
What if there is only one universally accepted
way to build puzzles and everyone just agrees
on it?
Yes.
That shared knowledge is the prior.
Suddenly, that one leaked piece isn't useless at
all.
It's the exact anchor you need to just
instantly fill in the rest of the picture
from memory.
That is a fantastic translation of the math.
The paper visualizes reconstruction as a gravitational pull
between three forces.
Okay.
Three forces.
Yeah.
When you're trying to rebuild the system, force
number one pulls you toward making sure your
model matches the leaked piece of code.
Force number two pulls you toward the basic
laws of computing and physics.
I mean, it has to actually run.
Right.
But force number three is the massive, overwhelming
gravitational pull of the industry prior.
What everyone already assumes is the most logical
way to build an AI.
And because that third force is so incredibly
strong in the tech world right now, rebuilding
the leaked model wasn't some impossible search in
the dark.
It was a rapid slide down a very
steep hill.
They just followed the gravity.
The paper calls this a prior dominant attractor.
The effective uncertainty about the rest of the
system was incredibly low, even if mathematically the
actual piece of code that leaked was small.
The shared context did all the heavy lifting.
Wow.
But let me pause and play devil's advocate
for a second here.
Because we're talking about gravitational pulls and prior
dominant attractors.
But when I read the news about these
leaks, it usually just comes down to some
tired engineer making a stupid mistake.
Right.
The human error angle.
Yeah.
Somebody clicked public instead of private on a
repository.
Or someone accidentally pushed an internal key to
a public forum.
Why are we applying high level system dynamics
to a guy who just forgot to drink
his coffee and hit the wrong button?
It's a very common reaction.
But the paper explicitly rejects that simple human
error narrative.
The author argues that treating a leak as
a random accident completely misses the fundamental physics
of how modern software pipelines operate.
The paper models a tech company's deployment pipeline
as a constrained dynamical system.
A constrained dynamical system.
What does that actually mean in the context
of an office full of programmers?
Think of a pipeline as a path that
a piece of software has to travel down
before it goes live.
Along that path, there are constraints, security checks,
automated tests, code reviews.
Like checkpoints.
Exactly.
The software is only supposed to move forward
if it stays within those safe boundaries.
But modern tech companies also rely heavily on
manual human steps to verify things.
A human actually has to look at something
and approve it.
Okay, so human steps introduce a chance for
failure.
But people make mistakes all the time.
That still sounds like an accident to me.
Here is the key mechanism, though.
Velocity.
The paper introduces this idea of velocity-induced
failure.
As a tech company tries to move faster
and faster to beat its competitors, the iteration
velocity goes up.
The software is flying down that pipeline at
breakneck speed.
Because they have to ship features fast.
Right.
And the author shows mathematically that the faster
the system moves, the less time an operator
has to successfully verify those constraints.
That makes intuitive sense.
I mean, if I'm throwing baseballs at you,
you might catch the first one.
But if I throw a 50 at you
in 10 seconds, you're going to drop them.
Exactly.
And the math proves that if the probability
of a human succeeding at a security check
is anything less than 100%, and if that
probability drops as speed increases, then over a
long enough timeline, a failure isn't just possible.
It is a structural inevitability.
A structural inevitability.
Yes.
The system is operating in a regime where
reliable, long-term rule enforcement is literally mathematically
impossible.
Wow.
So the argument is that the engineer didn't
fail.
The system itself was designed to eventually fail.
Precisely.
If you build a pipeline that requires manual
human checks, and then you just crank the
speed dial up to maximum, you haven't built
an accident-prone system.
You have built a system that guarantees a
breach.
To increase speed while maintaining manual choke points
is to engineer your own eventual failure.
The leak was preordained by the velocity of
the system.
That is a terrifying thought for any manager
running a fast-paced development team right now.
So if the failure was structurally inevitable, let's
look at what happens the second after the
code gets out.
Because the paper takes another fascinating turn here.
Yeah, the thermodynamics section.
Right.
It moves away from the math of pipelines
and starts talking about the physics of how
information spreads.
It basically argues that putting the genie back
in the bottle is not just practically hard,
it is mathematically impossible.
This is where the author brings in the
laws of thermodynamics.
They use a diffusion equation to model how
the leaked information behaves.
In physics, if you have a closed room
and you release a pressurized tank of gas,
that gas doesn't just stay in one corner.
No, it spreads out.
It diffuses.
It spreads out until it fills the entire
room evenly.
And once it's spread out, you can't just
like wave your hands and force the gas
back into the tank.
Right.
That is the concept of entropy.
In a closed system, entropy or disorder always
increases.
And that process is completely irreversible without applying
a massive, almost impossible amount of external energy.
Okay, so applying this to the leak.
The paper treats leaked digital information exactly like
that gas.
Once the private server boundary is breached, the
information diffuses across the global network of the
Internet.
Here's where it gets really interesting to me.
So when a company's lawyers rush out and
send a cease and desist letter to a
specific website demanding they take down the leaked
code, what are they actually doing in a
thermodynamic sense?
In thermodynamic terms, they are attempting a local
intervention on a global diffusion process.
I'm trying to picture that.
It feels like, okay, imagine you spill a
massive cup of hot coffee on a thick
living room carpet.
The liquid immediately starts soaking through the fibers,
spreading outward, seeping into the floorboards underneath.
It's everywhere.
And the legal team's response is to take
a single, tiny paper napkin and dab at
one specific drop on the surface, while the
entire rest of the room just absorbs the
spill.
That is a very accurate, if slightly painful,
analogy.
You cannot assert a new boundary condition on
a system that has already relaxed.
The spill happened.
The diffusion has happened.
The total entropy of the information has increased.
The paper proves that sending a takedown notice
to a GitHub repository does absolutely nothing to
reverse the global spread of that information across
peer-to-peer networks, private hard drives, secondary
servers.
This connects directly to a really profound economic
argument the author makes about what they call
computational enclosure.
Because when I think of a moat for
a tech company, I just think of the
software itself.
But the paper argues that the value isn't
the software, right?
Correct.
The pure kayak has no intrinsic defensive value
because it can be perfectly replicated at zero
cost.
The economic value entirely comes from the artificial
enclosure the company builds around it.
The fence?
Yes.
It is very much like the historical enclosure
of land.
The soil was always there, but it only
became a private, wealth-generating asset when someone
built a fence around it and heavily guarded
the gate.
So when this thermodynamic leak happened, the real
damage wasn't that they lost a few million
lines of code.
Not at all.
The true catastrophic damage was the revelation to
the entire market that the fence was incredibly
weak.
The leak proved two things simultaneously.
First, that the company's internal constraints couldn't handle
their own velocity.
The pipeline was broken.
Right.
And second, because of that massive shared industry
prior we talked about earlier, the cost for
competitors to reconstruct the core technology was practically
zero.
Yeah.
The secret sauce wasn't actually secret.
Everyone already knew the ingredients.
They just needed to see the receipt for
one of the spices, and they could cook
the whole meal.
The author formally connects these ideas.
Low effective uncertainty about the shadow, low reconstruction
cost, and weak economic enclosure are all mathematically
equivalent.
Wow.
The leak didn't destroy their moat.
It just revealed that the moat had dried
up a long time ago.
The shared knowledge of the AI field had
become so rich that any enclosure based purely
on hiding code was already structurally doomed.
This makes me wonder about the entire future
of the tech industry.
I mean, if algorithmic secrets are essentially indefensible,
if everyone is going to eventually guess your
math because the whole industry shares the same
brain, how does any company maintain an advantage?
Do they have to pivot entirely away from
software secrets?
That is the exact logical conclusion the paper
reaches.
Long term competitive advantage can no longer rely
on the opacity of the code.
If your moat is built on a secret
algorithm, mathematics dictates that it will eventually decay
as the industry prior matures.
So what's left?
The only sustainable enclosures moving forward have to
be built on physical high dimensional assets that
genuinely cannot be leaked.
Things you can't put on a thumb drive.
Exactly.
You cannot leak a $2 billion football field
sized data center.
You cannot leak the massive, messy, continuously updating
pipeline of live user data.
You can't leak the physical supply chain of
microchips.
Those are properties that remain genuinely complex and
difficult to replicate no matter how much the
industry knowledge matures.
Okay, I want to take a breath here
because this is where the paper executes a
pivot that completely blew my mind.
Yeah, this is the big shift.
Up to this point, everything we've talked about
makes total sense for a systems engineer.
We have software pipelines, velocity constraints, the thermodynamics
of data leaks, and corporate moats.
But now, the author takes this exact same
mathematical framework, configuration spaces, projection, entropy, and applies
it to what you and I do every
single day, reading and writing text.
This is the boldest claim in the entire
paper.
The author transitions from structural engineering to the
philosophy of knowledge.
They state that an essay, a written argument,
and a software pipeline have the exact same
formal mathematical structure.
An essay is a software pipeline.
I really had to sit with that for
a minute.
How does that work?
How is a paragraph like a piece of
code compiling?
Well, think about what a software pipeline is
doing.
It transitions from one state to another, and
those transitions are strictly governed by rules, interfaces,
and dependencies.
Right.
If it fails a test, it stops.
If a piece of code doesn't meet the
dependency requirements, the pipeline breaks.
It halts.
Now, look at a well-written, rigorous human
essay.
It is also a trajectory.
It moves the reader from an opening premise
to a final conclusion, and the transitions between
sentences and paragraphs are governed by logical constraints.
Like, if you set up a definition in
paragraph one, paragraph two has to actually obey
that definition.
Exactly.
The premises, the definitions, the historical facts you
cite, the logical tensions you resolve, those are
the constraints of the essay.
When an argument is truly brilliant, it achieves
what the author calls constraint closure.
Which is the title of the paper, Constraint
Closure.
Right.
It means every single step in that essay
is structurally necessary.
If you try to remove a key sentence,
or if you swap paragraph three with paragraph
seven, the entire argument collapses.
The logic breaks, just like a software pipeline
failing a test.
That's tight.
A great essay has a certain fragility to
it, but that fragility is actually proof of
its rigor.
It proves that the author was tightly bound
by logic.
So let's contrast that with generative AI.
What happens when I go to a large
language model, and I type in a totally
generic prompt like, write me a 2,000
word essay about the causes of the French
Revolution?
If we connect this to the bigger picture,
when an AI generates text from a loose
prompt like that, it produces a system without
constraint closure.
The author uses a very specific, slightly cutting
term for this.
They call it an essay-shaped object.
An essay-shaped object.
I love that.
It wears the clothes of an essay, but
there's no body underneath.
Visually, it looks right.
It has an introduction, body paragraphs, and a
conclusion.
It uses transition words like furthermore, however, and
in conclusion.
But fundamentally, it is completely empty.
Because there's no logic.
Because there was no underlying logical tension or
specific argumentative boundary constraining the AI.
The text just reverts to that concept we
discussed earlier.
The prior dominant attractor.
Just doing the puzzle piece thing again.
Yes.
The generator just slides down the hill toward
the most statistically likely generic, academic-sounding sequence
of words in its massive training data.
It is locally coherent, meaning the grammar from
one word to the next is perfect, but
globally the trajectory is completely arbitrary.
Let me try to build on the maze
analogy to really highlight the difference here.
So writing a genuine human essay, one with
constraint closure, is like trying to navigate a
complex physical maze.
Yeah.
You have a starting point and you want
to reach the exit, but you hit walls.
The constraints.
Right.
Those walls are the historical facts you can't
ignore, the definitions you establish, the counter-arguments
you have to address.
You are forced to make very specific, intentional
turns to get through the maze.
Every step matters, because if you take the
wrong step, you hit a wall and fail.
That is constraint closure in action.
Now, compare that to an AI generating an
essay from a generic prompt.
The AI isn't in a maze.
The AI is standing in the middle of
a massive, empty, paved parking lot.
Oh, that's good.
It can walk in literally any direction it
wants.
Every step it takes is perfectly fine.
It won't trip.
The grammar is flawless.
But no single step actually matters.
There are no walls forcing it to turn.
It is just wandering aimlessly based on whatever
slight statistical breeze is blowing through its neural
network at that millisecond.
That is a phenomenal visualization of what the
paper calls informational emptiness.
The text exists, it occupies space, but it
navigates no obstacles.
But wait, let me push back on this,
because I think a lot of people would
argue that volume equals value.
What if the AI spits out a massive
50-page dossier?
What if it is packed with dates, names,
and incredibly detailed paragraphs?
Doesn't the sheer length and detail count for
something?
If I receive a 5,000-word report,
my instinct is to think, wow, this is
substantial.
Historically, that instinct was completely correct.
And this brings us to a massive cultural
shift the author identifies, the total collapse of
length as a signal of quality.
The collapse of length.
For the entire history of human communication, length
was a very reliable proxy for effort.
It is incredibly difficult and time-consuming for
a human being to research, structure, and write
5,000 coherent words.
So as a reader, you could rationally look
at a long document and assume the author
must have wrestled with a lot of constraints
to produce this.
Length was the receipt that proved you did
the work.
Exactly.
It was a low-dimensional signal that proved
high-dimensional effort.
But generative AI has completely severed that correlation.
Today, a 5,000-word document can be
produced with near-zero constraints and near-zero
effort in about four seconds.
The cost of producing length has plummeted to
effectively nothing.
So when we read one of these long
AI articles, say maybe you're looking for a
recipe online or you're reading a generic SEO
marking post and your eyes just glaze over
and you feel that specific soul-crushing boredom
we talked about at the very beginning, you
aren't just being a snob about bad writing.
No.
You are experiencing a fundamental epistemic failure.
You are realizing that the text contains no
mutual information about the mind that created it.
Think about the concept of minimum description length,
which is a principle in computer science.
Minimum description length.
Okay.
It essentially asks, what is the shortest possible
set of instructions you would need to generate
this exact piece of data?
Okay.
So if the data is a sequence of
the number one repeated a million times, the
shortest description isn't a million ones.
It's just the instruction, print one a million
times.
Exactly.
Now apply that to text.
If you read a complex, highly constrained human
essay, the minimum description length is essential, the
essay itself, plus the years of specific human
experience and logic that went into it.
You cannot compress it.
But if you read a 5,000 word
AI essay that is just generic fluff, the
minimum description length is incredibly short.
The true underlying instruction is just run generic
language model with prompt rate 5,000 words
about history.
Wow.
So your brain subconsciously realizes that this massive
wall of text could have been generated by
a single two sentence prompt.
There is no complex human reasoning behind it.
So your brain just rationally decides to stop
paying attention.
Right.
The paper introduces a new metric to replace
length.
It's called constraint density.
This is the ratio of actual necessary constraint
imposing content to the total volume of words.
A text is only valuable if it's observable
properties severely limit the number of possible processes
that could have produced it.
This actually perfectly explains a massive shift we're
seeing in media right now.
Everyone complains that our attention spans are destroyed.
They say we can only read short, punchy
newsletters or aggressive, highly opinionated op-eds.
People blame social media.
They blame smartphones.
But the math says something else.
Exactly.
This mathematical framework suggests something completely different.
We aren't losing our attention spans at all.
We are adapting.
We are rationally ignoring a signal length that
has been hopelessly corrupted.
It is a totally rational Bayesian update by
the reading public.
Readers are actively hunting for high constraint density.
A tight 500 word essay that takes a
fierce, controversial stance and defends it with sharp
logic has an incredibly high constraint density.
Because it's taking risks.
It is fragile.
It is identifiable.
The reader knows exactly what kind of specific
human mind and logical process produced it.
Meanwhile, a 10,000 word neutral AI summary
has almost zero constraint density.
The short, opinionated piece is the maze.
The long AI piece is the parking lot.
Exactly.
We seek out the maze because it proves
someone actually did the work of navigating it.
Okay, but if I'm an AI company and
I realize that readers are desperately hunting for
these constraints, for logic, for premises, for a
strong point of view, can't I just update
my machine to fake it?
Can I just prompt the AI and say,
write a short punchy essay, make sure you
use explicit premises, take a strong stance and
sound really constrained.
This is a critical vulnerability and the author
dives into it deeply.
The short answer is yes, AI can simulate
constraints.
This is known as adversarial generation.
Adversarial generation.
The AI can be trained to sprinkle in
words like therefore, however, and it logically follows.
It can set up fake counter-arguments and
pretend to knock them down.
Right.
If I'm just skimming the article on my
phone while drinking coffee, I see the word
therefore and my brain automatically assumes, ah, a
logical deduction has occurred.
Under a shallow observation, a simulated constraint is
perfectly indistinguishable from a genuine constraint, but the
paper proved that simulated constraints completely fail under
what they call perturbation analysis.
Perturbation analysis.
So poking the system to see how it
reacts.
Imagine the text is a tower of blocks.
Perturbing it means pulling one block out to
see what happens.
If you take a genuine human essay and
you remove a core foundational premise from paragraph
two, the entire conclusion in paragraph 10 becomes
completely unsupported.
The tower falls over.
The logic shatters.
The text breaks because the conclusion was structurally
dependent on that specific premise.
The maze collapses because you removed a load
-bearing wall.
But if you perform that same perturbation on
a simulated AI essay, if you delete its
fake premise, the rest of the text still
flows perfectly fine.
The conclusion doesn't shatter.
Wait, really?
Yeah.
Why?
Because the conclusion was never actually dependent on
the premise in the first place.
The AI was simply predicting the next most
likely words in a sequence.
There is no deep underlying logical architecture.
The therefore was just a statistical decoration.
That is fascinating.
But let's bring this back to reality for
a second.
Practically speaking, I don't have the time to
perform perturbation analysis on every single email, newsletter,
and article I read.
I can't sit there deleting paragraphs from a
blog post to see if the logic holds
up.
I never get any work done.
And the author acknowledges that limitation.
Because we don't have the computational power or
the time to rigorously test every text, humans
have developed a survival mechanism, the reputational prior.
The reputational prior.
How does that help us?
This raises an important question about how we
handle bias.
It connects to a deeply counterintuitive mathematical argument
the paper makes.
In our modern culture, we tend to view
bias as a bad thing.
A moral failing in a writer.
We constantly demand perfect objective neutrality.
Sure.
We want the unbiased truth.
But mathematically, in a high volume information environment,
a writer's declared bias is actually an incredibly
valuable structural constraint.
Wait, explain that to me.
Bias is good.
Let's use an example.
Suppose you're reading a summary of a new
economic policy.
If you know the writer is a staunch,
dedicated libertarian, that knowledge acts as a massive
constraint on the text.
Oh, I see.
You know their prior.
You know the exact ideological framework, the specific
maze that produced those words.
It restricts the space of possible generating processes
in your mind.
I know exactly where they're coming from.
I can see the walls of their maze.
Precisely.
The text has very low projection degeneracy.
You can clearly link the shadow on the
wall back to the specific object that cast
it.
Now, compare that to reading a perfectly neutral,
anonymous summary generated by an AI.
The AI has no declared viewpoint.
It's just a black box trying to sound
like the voice of objective truth from nowhere.
And because it is a black box, it
has massive projection degeneracy.
It could be quietly weighting certain data points
over others, pulling from completely invisible training biases,
or just hallucinating.
You have no way of knowing what invisible
maze produced the text.
Therefore, you cannot trust it.
So what does this all mean?
This completely flips the script on how we
consume media.
Oh.
If I understand this right, I should actually
trust a biased, highly opinionated human writer, as
long as their bias is transparent, more than
I trust a perfectly neutral AI summary.
Yes.
Because with the human, the generative process is
mathematically legible to me.
With the AI, it's just an unconstrained statistical
blur.
That is the exact epistemological shift the author
advocates.
Transparency is not a moral property.
It is an informational one.
The public demand for perfectly unbiased, neutral text
is mathematically incoherent.
That's a strong statement.
It is.
But the math backed it up.
When you demand neutral text from a machine,
you are demanding unconstrained text.
And unconstrained text inevitably leads to informational emptiness.
We shouldn't demand neutrality.
We should demand legibility.
We need to know what forces shaped the
words.
That is going to completely change how I
curate my reading list.
Okay.
So we've established that standard generative AI, the
huge, large language models everyone uses fundamentally produce
degenerate, constraint-free text.
They're just wandering parking lots.
Right.
But we aren't going to put the AI
genie back in the bottle.
We are going to keep using these machines.
So does the paper offer any hope?
How do we fix the architecture so the
machines actually build mazes instead of parking lots?
It does.
The final sections of the paper transition from
diagonal...